Adding build provenance for all registries doc (#17)
ossf/wg-securing-software-repos: docs/build-provenance-for-all-registries.md

# Build Provenance for All Registries

There’s a new security capability that registries can offer - build provenance - which verifiably links a package back to its source code and build instructions.

> **The goal is to have packages be transparent about their contents.** Note that we aren’t saying a package with provenance is _inherently_ secure or trustworthy, just that links to source code and build instructions exist (and are non-falsifiable) for consumers to follow and make their own determination, either through manual inspection or by evaluating provenance with their own policies. This is a stronger guarantee than information optionally and manually being supplied by maintainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The goal is to have packages be transparent about their contents.** Note that we aren’t saying a package with provenance is _inherently_ secure or trustworthy, just that non-falsifiable links to source code and build instructions exist for consumers to follow and make their own determination, either through manual inspection or by evaluating provenance with their own policies. This is a stronger guarantee than information optionally and manually being supplied by maintainers.
```

For provenance to be meaningful, it requires using a build system that can:

- Run a build in an isolated, ephemeral environment

> - Securely communicate the build properties to the registry, in a way the build instructions themselves cannot tamper with

Reviewer: I'd suggest breaking these into two items.

For detailed technical specifications on assembling provenance and interacting with Sigstore services, see the [Sigstore Client Specification](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kbhK2qyPPk8SLavHzYSDM8-Ueul9_oxIMVFuWMWKz0E/edit?usp=sharing). Here we’ll go over a high-level description of the steps your tooling will follow (and take a look at [npm CLI’s publish.js](https://github.com/npm/cli/blob/latest/workspaces/libnpmpublish/lib/publish.js) for a reference implementation):

If your registry supports private packages, you should ensure that you’re working on a public package. This is because the build metadata will be published to Sigstore’s transparency log, Rekor, which publishers of private packages might not want to make public.

Then we want to request an OIDC token that Sigstore Fulcio will accept. You should ensure you’re on [CI/CD provider Fulcio supports](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/tree/main/federation), and if so, request an OIDC token with the audience set to "sigstore".

> Next you’ll construct the build provenance attestations. We recommend using [in-toto attestations](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/README.md#in-toto-attestation-framework-spec) for formatting your attestation document, and [SLSA provenance](https://slsa.dev/provenance/v1) for the predicates in the in-toto attestation document. See [npm CLI's provenance.js](https://github.com/npm/cli/blob/latest/workspaces/libnpmpublish/lib/provenance.js) for a reference implementation.

Reviewer 2: I want to note that in-toto/attestation also provides models in [Python](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/tree/main/python/in_toto_attestation/predicates/provenance/v1), [Go](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/tree/main/go/predicates/provenance/v1), and [Java](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/tree/main/java/io/github/intoto/attestation/predicates/provenance/v1) using the official [SLSA Provenance proto](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/protos/in_toto_attestation/predicates/provenance/v1/provenance.proto), with published libraries in the works in those languages.

Author: I've added a link to the official SLSA provenance proto.

But we aren’t quite ready to send things to the registry - first you’ll sign your build attestation document (with the Fulcio signing certificate), publish it to Sigstore’s Rekor to get a transparency log entry, and use that to create your Sigstore signature bundle with your signatures over your build artifact, the build attestation document, your transparency log entry, and a timestamp.

You might be wondering how much of this Sigstore interaction you need to implement yourself. Ideally there would be a mature Sigstore library in a language supported by your ecosystem tooling. There are currently libraries for [JavaScript](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-js), [Go](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-go), [Python](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-python), as well libraries under development for [Rust](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-rs), [Ruby](https://github.com/sigstore/ruby-sigstore), and [Java](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-java). See [sigstore-conformance](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-conformance) to ensure client libraries are behaving as expected.

# Extending the registry to support build provenance

> Now we’re ready to publish the package to the registry, but we need a way to authorize the request. Instead of requiring maintainers to store their password or an unscoped API token in the cloud CI/CD provider, we recommend allowing maintainers to set up a trust relationship between the cloud CI/CD system and your registry via OIDC. For an example of this, see <https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/>. In fact, registries can implement OIDC trust relationshipƒ to authorize publish requests without needing any support from Sigstore client libraries. So this is an excellent scoped project to start with, which is exactly what PyPI did.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we’re ready to publish the package to the registry, but we need a way to authorize the request. Instead of requiring maintainers to store their password or an unscoped API token in the cloud CI/CD provider, we recommend allowing maintainers to set up a trust relationship between the cloud CI/CD system and your registry via OIDC. For an example of this, see <https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/>. In fact, registries can implement OIDC trust relationships to authorize publish requests without needing any support from Sigstore client libraries. So this is an excellent scoped project to start with, which is exactly what PyPI did.
```

> Finally, we submit the package (along with the signed build attestations) to the registry. Our work is done… as the CLI tooling! Now we need to verify the provenance on the registry side. See above for a discussion on what Sigstore tooling is available in what programming languages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we submit the package and the signed build attestations to the registry. Our work is done… as the CLI tooling! Now we need to verify the provenance on the registry side. See above for a discussion on what Sigstore tooling is available in what programming languages.
```
The parenthetical makes this seem incidental, or supplementary, whereas in fact publishing the provenance metadata on the registry is crucial.

There’s one last verification we recommend registries do - check to see if the previous version had provenance, and if so, see if the source code has a new URI (i.e. if the project moved to a new name, new organization, or a new source code provider). While this could be an indication of compromise, it could also be a normal evolution of a project. We recommend registries do not allow unexpected changes in provenance, however, they should provide package maintainers a way to indicate ahead of time that the package provenance is expected to change. Relatedly, we recommend registries not allow a package to publish without provenance after it has published with provenance - unless the maintainers have indicated ahead of time that they intend to no longer publish with provenance.

> At this point, we recommend the registry make a publish attestation document and send it to Sigstore’s Rekor. This creates an auditable public record of what packages have been published to the registry with provenance. For an example of a publish attestation, see <https://search.sigstore.dev/?logIndex=20766332>. Note that this is \*not\* using an OIDC token or a Fulcio signing certificate; we recommend using a HSM-backed durable signing key, managed by the registry, for signing the publish attestation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, we recommend the registry make a `publish` attestation document and send it to Sigstore’s Rekor. This creates an auditable public record of what packages have been published to the registry with provenance. For an example of a publish attestation, see <https://search.sigstore.dev/?logIndex=20766332>. Note that this is \*not\* using an OIDC token or a Fulcio signing certificate; we recommend using a HSM-backed durable signing key, managed by the registry, for signing the publish attestation.
```

> At this point, we recommend the registry make a publish attestation document and send it to Sigstore’s Rekor. This creates an auditable public record of what packages have been published to the registry with provenance. For an example of a publish attestation, see <https://search.sigstore.dev/?logIndex=20766332>. Note that this is \*not\* using an OIDC token or a Fulcio signing certificate; we recommend using a HSM-backed durable signing key, managed by the registry, for signing the publish attestation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At this point, we recommend the registry make a [`publish`](https://github.com/npm/attestation/tree/34f164c30ea75a364646e2439d9d1408bea57585/specs/publish/v0.1) attestation document and send it to Sigstore’s Rekor. This creates an auditable public record of what packages have been published to the registry with provenance. For an example of a published attestation, see <https://search.sigstore.dev/?logIndex=20766332>. Note that this is \*not\* authenticated using an OIDC token or a Fulcio signing certificate; we recommend using a HSM-backed durable signing key, managed by the registry, for signing the publish attestation.
```

Once the bundle has been verified and the publish attestation publicly recorded, we can store the package and the Sigstore bundle for later use. The registry should maintain a one-to-one mapping between a package at a specific version and its associated provenance. It should retain that provenance for as long as it retains the associated package version.

# Supplying build provenance to users for verification

Generating build provenance is an important first step, but its value as a security capability is when we provide this information to users for them to verify and then use that information to make informed risk decisions.

When serving out build provenance, the registry should periodically ensure that the linked source code and build instructions still exist. If they do not, they should consider the package to no longer have provenance.

We recommend build provenance is served three ways: in the registry web UI, via an API call to the registry, and in CLI tooling.

> The registry web UI should convey to consumers that a package has provenance, but **not** that it is automatically trustworthy. Remember, build provenance just provides links back to the source code and build instructions - package consumers still need to follow those links to assess trustworthiness. We recommend providing literal links back to the source code, build instructions, and transparency log entry of the build provenance; here is what that looks like on the npm registry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The registry web UI should convey to consumers that a package has provenance, but **not** that it is automatically trustworthy. Remember, build provenance just provides links back to the source code and build instructions. Package consumers still need to follow those links to assess trustworthiness. We recommend providing literal links back to the source code, build instructions, and transparency log entry of the build provenance. Here is what that looks like on the npm registry:
```

> # Build Provenance for All Registries

Reviewer 4: IMO "registry" isn't a universal term. Maybe "package registries", "package repositories", or just make sure to define it in the first paragraph or two

Author: Package registries sounds good to me! I have updated the text.

> There’s a new security capability that registries can offer - build provenance - which verifiably links a package back to its source code and build instructions.

Reviewer 4: I think there's room for a *touch* more motivation:

> There’s a new security capability that registries can offer - build provenance - which verifiably links a package back to its source code and build instructions. When package source is publicly available, this prevents an attacker from building a different, malicious artifact and publishing that to the registry.

Reviewer 4: You do hit on this below but I think getting it in the first sentence is nice too

Author: I have added additional text.

> There’s a new security capability that registries can offer - build provenance - which verifiably links a package back to its source code and build instructions.

Author: I added "Since these links are publicly available, package consumers can verify the package contains what it says, instead of having to trust that the build process or source code wasn't compromised." to bring in elements of the SLSA model, while also incorporating @znewman01's feedback below.

Build provenance starts with the build system making information about source code and build instructions available in a non-falsifiable way. During a build, that information is sent to a public-good signing service called [Sigstore](https://www.sigstore.dev/how-it-works), which provides a public transparency log for auditing purposes as well as enabling signing without requiring individual users to manage keys. The signed build provenance is then sent to a registry on package upload, and served to users when they consume a package. In this document, we describe the design decisions and high-level implementation for adding build provenance to npm, to show other registries how they could also support this capability.

> Before we talk about the implementation, let's talk through the design decisions. **The goal is to have packages be transparent about their contents.** Note that we aren’t saying a package with provenance is _inherently_ secure or trustworthy, just that non-falsifiable links to source code and build instructions exist for consumers to follow and make their own determination, either through manual inspection or by evaluating provenance with their own policies. This is a stronger guarantee than information optionally and manually being supplied by maintainers.

Reviewer 5: It feels like it would help to have two additional items in this introduction:

1. A system diagram indicating what components are affected, and how they interoperate with existing components.  (e.g. code added in: build/publish CLI, package registry API, package fetch CLI.  Used but not changed: Sigstore, package storage)

2. A brief explainer of the properties added to the system, probably as a bulleted list.  i.e. "Packages _can_ include signed, verified descriptions of how they were built", "Package provenance is associated with an identity that attests to it", "End-users can make decisions based on package provenance", "Signed provenance _does not_ guarantee that a package has no vulnerabilities, or that it is non-malicious".

Author: I moved the component diagram up and added a "How Build Provenance Works" section to the introduction for your first suggestion.

I like your second suggestion as well, but I think that will make more sense in a follow-up "why Sigstore for build provenance" doc, that will also address other feedback on this pull request.

> For provenance to provide strong security guarantees, it requires using a build system that can:

Reviewer 5: This feels like the start of a `## Package Building` section

Author: I reworked the introduction based on your feedback to have more explicit sections.

If your registry supports private packages, the registry should check that you’re working on a public package. This is because the build metadata will be published to Sigstore’s transparency log, Rekor, which publishers of private packages might not want to make public.

Then we want to request an OIDC token that Sigstore Fulcio will accept. The registry should ensure you’re on [CI/CD provider Fulcio supports](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/tree/main/federation), and if so, request an OIDC token with the audience set to "sigstore".

Next you’ll construct the build provenance attestations. We recommend using [in-toto attestations](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/README.md#in-toto-attestation-framework-spec) for formatting your attestation document, and [SLSA provenance](https://slsa.dev/provenance/v1) for the predicates in the in-toto attestation document. See [npm CLI's provenance.js](https://github.com/npm/cli/blob/latest/workspaces/libnpmpublish/lib/provenance.js) for a reference implementation.

> Now you’re ready to sign the package! You’ll create an ephemeral key pair, and then send to Fulcio the OIDC token, your ephemeral public key, the OIDC subject signed with your private key (the “challenge value”), and your build artifact signed with your private key. See [sigstore-js' sign.ts](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-js/blob/main/packages/client/src/sign.ts#L110) for a reference implementation.

Author: You don't send the build artifact to Fulcio, just the signature - I updated the wording to be more explicit.

> Fulcio will return to you a X.509 signing certificate, with the build provenance properties (including your public key) as OIDs in that certificate. You can now throw away your ephemeral private key.

Author: The build attestation document is signed with the Fulcio signing certificate, not the ephemeral private key.

But we aren’t quite ready to send things to the registry - first you’ll sign your build attestation document (with the Fulcio signing certificate), publish it to Sigstore’s Rekor to get a transparency log entry, and use that to create your Sigstore signature bundle with your signatures over your build artifact, the build attestation document, your transparency log entry, and a timestamp.

You might be wondering how much of this Sigstore interaction you need to implement yourself. Ideally there would be a mature Sigstore library in a language supported by your ecosystem tooling. There are currently libraries for [JavaScript](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-js), [Go](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-go), [Python](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-python), as well libraries under development for [Rust](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-rs), [Ruby](https://github.com/sigstore/ruby-sigstore), and [Java](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-java). See [sigstore-conformance](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-conformance) to ensure client libraries are behaving as expected.

# Extending the registry to support build provenance

> Now we’re ready to publish the package to the registry, but we need a way to authorize the request. Instead of requiring maintainers to store their password or an unscoped API token in the cloud CI/CD provider, we recommend allowing maintainers to set up a trust relationship between the cloud CI/CD system and your registry via OIDC. For an example of this, see <https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/>. In fact, registries can implement OIDC trust relationships to authorize publish requests without needing any support from Sigstore client libraries. So this is an excellent scoped project to start with, which is exactly what PyPI did.

Reviewer 6: Wait, why do I need to do this? The build provenance already includes proof of the cloud CI/CD OIDC dance. If either of them are invalid, or worse they are both valid but don't match, something is very wrong. If the bill provenance is valid, then the cloud CI/CD OIDC is redundant. The general adage is to make invalid states on representable. What is the justification here for the redundant or invalid inputs?

Author: You certainly could use the Fulcio signing certificate to also authorize the package publish!

This suggestion is more around scoping and ordering feature delivery. PyPI's Trusted Publisher feature delivered a security improvement much more quickly than npm's build provenance feature. You could tie these two features together in one big release, but you don't have to.

Reviewer 6: Not just this paragraph, this hole draft seems odd. The way you describe it in the discussion makes it sound `descriptive`. Like it is just what npm did and how to interact with that implementation. But the text itself comes across to me as `proscriptive`. Like "we recommend", and how it does not discuss the alternatives that were considered. Who is your audience and what are you trying to tell them? It is reasonable to not want to write the definitive treatise that describes all of the reasonable possibilities and why each one should be considered, in which case the text could just be explicit about when it is describing npm's choices.

Reviewer 7: The goal here is for the WG to produce something proscriptive, for other software repositories, based on the prior experience of npm/PyPI.

Author: I've reworded this section to take this feedback into account!

> Finally, we submit the package and the signed build attestations to the registry. Our work is done… as the CLI tooling! Now we need to verify the provenance on the registry side. See above for a discussion on what Sigstore tooling is available in what programming languages.

Reviewer 5: "we" is doing a lot of work here, which is a bit clever, but may not be entirely clear.  I'd suggest making the subject more explicit:

> Once the packaging CLI has submitted the package and the signed build attestations to the registry, the registy needs to verify these artifacts.  This should be done before the artifact is published (made visible) by the registry.  The sigstore libraries mentioned above may be helpful in this process.

Author: The intent was to avoid explicitly referring to the CLI tooling, as above we have that as a recommendation and not a requirement:

> We recommend building this functionality into a CLI tool. Most ecosystems already have some CLI tool involved in the package publishing process, and this allows the implementation to be shared across CI/CD providers.

... but thinking about it more, maybe that's silly, as every ecosystem we've talked to has CLI tooling for interacting with their package registry. Regardless, I reworded this section.

> For a detailed description of how to verify the Sigstore bundle, see the [Verification section of the Sigstore Client Specification](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kbhK2qyPPk8SLavHzYSDM8-Ueul9_oxIMVFuWMWKz0E/edit#heading=h.g11ovq2s1jxh). Additionally, the registry will want to verify that the bundle comes from a cloud CI/CD vendor it supports, and (of course) that the hash of the package matches what’s recorded in the Sigstore bundle.

Reviewer 5: Why does the registry need to verify that the signature in the bundle is from a supported cloud CI/CD vendor?  Shouldn't that be Fulcio's job?

Author: Sigstore/Fulcio is used for several things beyond build provenance, and as a result supports many OIDC providers that don't make sense in this context (like https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/blob/main/federation/accounts.google.com/config.yaml).
